As with previous editions, this edition of Contemporary Orthodontics 
has been extensively revised to maintain the original goal of the 
book: to provide an up-to-date overview of orthodontics that is 
accessible to students, useful for residents, and a valuable reference 
for practitioners. In each section of the book, basic background 
information needed by every dentist is covered first and is followed 
by more detailed information for orthodontic specialists.
New aspects of this edition include:
•	an	updated	section	on	human	embryology	in	which	all	the	
images now consist of human embryos, not experimental animals;
•	new	material	on	three-dimensional	(3-D)	imaging	and	use 
of	3-D	superimpositions	to	better	understand	treatment	
outcomes;
•	a	new,	visual	way	to	compare	the	material	properties	of	various	
orthodontic archwires;
•	further	information	on	bonding	techniques,	bracket	develop-
ments, and biomechanical considerations;
•	an	expanded	discussion	of	current	growth	modification	proce-
dures and outcomes;
•	new	aspects	of	temporary	anchorage	device	use	for	skeletal	
anchorage, especially linked screws for palatal anchorage and 
the biomechanics of skeletal anchorage; and
•	case	treatment	examples	of	management	of	complex	problems	
in comprehensive orthodontic or surgical-orthodontic treatment 
at all ages.
As before, literature citations have been chosen to include selected 
classic papers but largely are taken from recent publications that 
provide current information and cite previous publications. The 
goal is to open the door to a more detailed evaluation of the 
subject without including hundreds of older citations in the text. 
As the emphasis on evidence-based treatment increases, systematic 
reviews and meta-analysis are pulling together information from 
multiple studies, and we also have incorporated findings from 
well-done reviews of this type. Unfortunately, the emphasis must 
be on well done because by no means are all these reviews focused 
and conducted in a way that provides clinically useful data. We 
have attempted to provide recommendations for what are now the 
preferred approaches to treatment, while indicating how certain 

we	can	be	(or	how	uncertain	we	ought	to	be)	that	current	views	
are correct.
This edition of the book is supported by two types of supple-
mental teaching material available through Internet connections: 
(1)	self-instructional	computer	teaching	modules	primarily	oriented	
toward	predoctoral	dental	students	(but	quite	useful	in	residency	
training	as	well)	and	(2)	video	recordings	of	graduate-level	clinical	
seminars on a variety of topics. Both types of supplemental materials 
are used at the University of North Carolina and at other schools 
in the United States and abroad.
The computer modules have been revised and updated 
recently to match the content of this edition and are available to 
students at participating dental schools on a dedicated website,  
www.orthodonticinstruction.com. Supplying the modules in this 
way	has	two	major	advantages:	(1)	once	access	to	the	website	
has been granted, students can use the teaching modules any-
where,	and	(2)	updates	and	correction	of	errors	are	made	on	
the website and are immediately available to all users. A preview 
of these teaching materials is available on the website. They 
are	available	in	course	packages	(four	separate	courses	for	the	
four	levels	of	instruction)	that	include	a	syllabus	with	reading/
viewing assignments, unit and course tests, and outlines for the 
small-group seminars that are an integral part of the teaching 
approach. Access to individual components of the courses also can  
be arranged.
The “blended” educational method that includes the use of 
recorded seminars is based on the finding that orthodontic residents 
who prepare for a seminar, observe the seminar on that topic that 
was recorded live at another school, and participate immediately 
in a follow-up discussion, learn as much as those who participated 
in the live seminar. The recorded seminars and the seminar prepara-
tion materials are available on a different dedicated website, 
watchseminars.com, where orthodontic, oral and maxillofacial 
surgery, and anesthesia teaching materials can be found.
For further information about the supplemental teaching 
materials,	contact	Dr.	William	Proffit	or	Dr.	Tate	Jackson	at	the	
Department	of	Orthodontics,	University	of	North	Carolina	School	
of	Dentistry,	Chapel	Hill,	North	Carolina.